@setfilename libdemangle-msvc.info
@settitle libdemangle-msvc

@copying
This file documents the libdemangle-msvc library.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

Licensed under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
See @url{https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt} for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title libdemangle-msvc
@subtitle Microsoft Visual C++ Demangling Library for ROCgdb
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top libdemangle-msvc

Microsoft Visual C++ demangling library for ROCgdb.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Purpose::              What this library does.
* Licensing::            License information.
* API::                  Public API reference.
* Integration::          How the library integrates with ROCgdb.
* Building::             How to build the library.
* Testing::              Running the test suite.
@end menu

@node Purpose
@chapter Purpose

This library provides MSVC symbol demangling functionality, currently
using the existing LLVM's MSVC demangler code.  It can be used by BFD,
GDB and binutils to demangle Microsoft Visual C++ symbols.

@node Licensing
@chapter Licensing

This library is licensed under Apache 2.0 with LLVM Exception.

@node API
@chapter API

The library exposes a C API compatible with libiberty's demangling
interface.

@section Core Demangling Functions

@deftypefun {char *} msvc_demangle (const char *@var{mangled}, int @var{options})
Demangle an MSVC symbol name.  Returns the demangled string, or
@code{NULL} if demangling fails.  Takes the same options as libiberty's
@code{cplus_demangle} for compatibility.  The caller must free the
returned string.
@end deftypefun

@section MSVC-Specific Utility Functions

The MSVC demangler does not provide an equivalent of libiberty's
@code{cplus_demangle_v3_components}, which returns a structured AST
from a mangled name.  Implementing one would require converting the
LLVM demangler's AST into libiberty's @code{demangle_component} tree.
Instead, an implementation is provided for only the two functions
that operate on libiberty's AST: @code{cp_class_name_from_physname}
and @code{method_name_from_physname} (defined in
@file{gdb/cp-support.c}).  The direct equivalents below are called
from those gdb helpers when the physname is MSVC-mangled.

@deftypefun {char *} llvm_msvc_class_name_from_physname (const char *@var{physname})
Extract the qualified enclosing class name from an MSVC method
physname.  Returns a malloc'd string (caller frees), or @code{NULL} if
@var{physname} is not a recognised MSVC method physname.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun {char *} llvm_msvc_method_name_from_physname (const char *@var{physname})
Extract the bare (unqualified) method name from an MSVC method
physname.  Returns a malloc'd string (caller frees), or @code{NULL} if
@var{physname} is not a recognised MSVC method physname.
@end deftypefun

@section BFD Integration Functions

@deftypefun {char *} bfd_demangle (bfd *@var{abfd}, const char *@var{mangled}, int @var{options})
Unified BFD demangling function.  Automatically detects symbol type
and uses the appropriate demangler.

@table @var
@item abfd
BFD object context.
@item mangled
The mangled symbol name.
@item options
Demangling options (@code{DMGL_*} flags).
@end table

Returns the demangled string (caller must free), or @code{NULL} if
demangling failed.
@end deftypefun

@section libiberty Registration

@deftypefun void cplus_demangle_set_msvc_handler ()
Register a callback for MSVC symbol demangling with libiberty.
Declared in @file{include/demangle.h}.  Once a handler is registered,
@code{cplus_demangle} dispatches symbols whose first character is
@samp{?} to it whenever the current style is @code{auto_demangling}
or @code{msvc_demangling}.  Passing @code{NULL} disables MSVC
demangling.  This entry point is called from @code{bfd_init} when
BFD is built with @code{HAVE_MSVC_DEMANGLER} defined.
@end deftypefun

The MSVC style is also exposed in libiberty's
@code{libiberty_demanglers[]} table as @samp{msvc}, so:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@command{c++filt -s msvc} / @command{c++filt --format=msvc} selects
the MSVC style explicitly.
@item
@command{(gdb) set demangle-style msvc} does the same in GDB.
@end itemize

When no handler is registered, an explicit MSVC style still parses,
but @code{cplus_demangle} returns @code{NULL} for every input.

@node Integration
@chapter Integration

The library is built as a separate static library,
@code{libdemangle_msvc}, which is then linked into the binutils tools
and GDB that need MSVC support.  @code{libbfd} and @code{libiberty}
remain free of any mandatory dependency on it.

Flow of control for a tool such as @command{c++filt} or @command{gdb}:

@enumerate
@item
The tool calls @code{bfd_init} during start-up.
@item
When @code{libbfd} was configured with @code{HAVE_MSVC_DEMANGLER},
@code{bfd_init} calls @code{cplus_demangle_set_msvc_handler
(msvc_demangle)}, installing the MSVC handler into libiberty.
@item
The tool calls @code{bfd_demangle} (or @code{cplus_demangle} directly).
@item
@code{bfd_demangle} peels any @samp{$tag$} wrapper and forwards to
@code{cplus_demangle}.
@item
@code{cplus_demangle} dispatches to the registered MSVC handler when
the style is @code{auto}/@code{msvc} and the symbol begins with
@samp{?}; otherwise it falls through to the Itanium / Rust / D / Ada
demanglers.
@end enumerate

If a tool was not linked against @code{libdemangle-msvc}, no handler
is registered and @code{cplus_demangle} simply returns @code{NULL} for
MSVC-shaped names.

@section Symbol Format Detection

The dispatch test is intentionally minimal and lives in libiberty's
@code{cplus_demangle}: a name is treated as MSVC-mangled iff its
first character is @samp{?}.  This is unambiguous because none of the
other supported demangling schemes (Itanium, Rust legacy, D, GNAT,
Java) produce names starting with @samp{?}.

@code{bfd_demangle} additionally peels MSVC compiler-emitted
@samp{$tag$} wrappers such as @samp{$unwind$?@dots{}},
@samp{$pdata$?@dots{}}, @samp{$xdata$?@dots{}} and
@code{$LN<n>$?@dots{}} before calling @code{cplus_demangle}, so that
the @samp{?}-prefixed core is what reaches the dispatch test.

@section Registration Architecture

To avoid mandatory linking of @code{libdemangle-msvc} into
@code{libbfd} or @code{libiberty}, the MSVC handler is registered at
run-time through libiberty's
@code{cplus_demangle_set_msvc_handler}:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Tools that don't use MSVC demangling don't link
@code{libdemangle-msvc}, and no handler is installed.
@item
Tools that support MSVC demangling link @code{libdemangle-msvc} and
get @code{bfd_init} to call
@code{cplus_demangle_set_msvc_handler(msvc_demangle)}.
@item
@code{cplus_demangle} then dispatches based on the registered handler
and the input symbol's shape.
@end itemize

@node Building
@chapter Building

@section Configure Options

BFD, GDB and binutils all read the same @option{--with-msvc-demangler}
flag passed to the top-level @command{configure}.  The top-level
resolves the value once and forwards it explicitly (as @code{yes} or
@code{no}) to every subdirectory.

@table @option
@item --with-msvc-demangler
@itemx --with-msvc-demangler=yes
Enable MSVC demangling.

@item --with-msvc-demangler=no
@itemx --without-msvc-demangler
Disable MSVC demangling.  @file{libdemangle-msvc} is dropped from
@code{configdirs} so it is not built.

@item @r{(omitted)}
Default.  Enabled when a Windows/PE target is configured
(@code{*-*-mingw*}, @code{*-*-cygwin*}, @code{*-*-windows*},
@code{*-*-pe} / @code{*-*-pe-*}, or @option{--enable-targets=all});
disabled otherwise.
@end table

When enabled, each subdirectory's @command{configure} defines
@code{HAVE_MSVC_DEMANGLER} in its own @file{config.h}.  Libiberty
itself has no configure option: the MSVC entry in
@code{libiberty_demanglers[]} is always present, and the dispatch
simply becomes a no-op when no handler is registered.

@section Standalone Build

@example
cd libdemangle-msvc
make clean
make
# Creates libdemangle-msvc.a
@end example

@section Debugging

Pass @option{--enable-msvc-demangle-debug} to @command{configure} to
enable diagnostic output from the msvc demangler's.

@example
./configure --enable-msvc-demangle-debug
@end example

@section ROCgdb Build

@example
./configure --enable-targets=all --with-msvc-demangler
make all-libdemangle-msvc
@end example

@node Testing
@chapter Testing

Run the test suite:

@example
cd libdemangle-msvc/testsuite
make check
@end example

@bye
